
Apologies in advance for the random nature of these notes. 

There are a few things coming to mind as being most important to pass along to whomever will do this next. 

1. Start now. Like yesterday. Like last month. Like May 1. It is critical, in order to give a fighting chance to contributors from far-away places which have difficult economics or no access to visa waivers, that the call and the final invitations are done many months in advance of the date of the Conference. Assume that it takes 3-6 months for people to secure funding for the trip. For those who might be able to apply for academic funding, some of them will have that opportunity only in the semester prior. (In several feedbacks from contributors in South America, February was too late to apply for funding for an April event; cutoffs were in December'22.) For those who have complicated and expensive visa processes, they will need certainty and invitiation letters at least 3 months in advance.
2. Everything takes longer than you think. Obviously this is a function of the bureaucratic framework in place, and the degree to which the host already has logistical support for hosting conferences. But if you are going from scratch with a volunteer crew, expect that you will have a hard time enforcing deadlines. Our choice in 2023 to not extend the open call submission deadline was somewhat radical and was a function of the short timeline. We thought we could announce results in January, but it ended up being at least 2 weeks (mid feb) later than that, because of challenges getting the peer review over the finish line, and then trying to sort the results. Plan to build a meta-review into the schedule, after the initial peer review period. We ended up taking several weeks for this because we had to, not because we scheduled it. (Programming decisions took seemingly forever, while balancing the diversity, the availability, the quality, the novelty, the feasibility... ) I do think one aspect of this tendency to take longer for everything has to do with the demographics of the Community, in that we represent a very wide spectrum of academic and independent constituents. Unlike many conferences, a large part of our Community are artists and makers and creatives and performers with all walks of educational and economic backgrounds, who may or may not have the same level of familiarity or comfort with academic norms, peer review protocols and other formalities. Hosts have to be flexible with their expectations (and technicalities) in order not to bias the Conference too much toward the academic and away from the independent artists. This is a tricky balancing act and takes extra time in every step of the process. 
3. Know the Community. Represent the Community in your decisions and priorities. We are progressive, we are feminist, we are intersectional, we are passionate about sustainability, accessibility, equality, diversity, open source, data privacy, decolonization, and radical transparency. ("Obscurantism is dangerous.") We reject impulses of favoritism, privilege, notions of virtuosity and celebrity, academic gatekeeping, and wastefulness. Biases must be examined. Everything is political. Take extreme care of these values, because to offend any one of them will be perceived as a hypocrisy, and will offend the sensibilities of the Community as a whole. 
4. Choose carefully the tools and platforms; we learned a lot from the challenges of dealing with tools that we thought would deliver 'close enough for free'. It's probably worth the investment to have full functionality. Best example: OpenConf. We took the self-hosted free option and found a lot of challenges that could have been avoided. The workarounds for the missing features meant that we were building extra interfaces in Google Forms, and then collating data from multiple sources, confusing Reviewers and Contributors alike with long, picky instructions and explanations, spending a great deal of extra time fixing inconsitencies and mistakes that arose from the convoluted processes we designed to manage the shortcomings of our tools. It's worth noting that when people get frustrated about the rules and the tools and mistakes and explanations, and long processes that don't make intuitive sense, they not only get annoyed with the process, they feel less confident about the fairness of the process. And the technicalities that arise will create more oppportunities for complaints and requests for exceptions... It snowballs. And you will have more than enough work to do without also managing an email tornado of complaints and questions and corrections to misinterpreted instructions. So the biggest lesson with the selection of tools: keep it clean and simple, intuitive and holistic solutions will pay for themselves with extra time gained to spend on the important things. But do definitely pay attention to security and data privacy concerns; your solutions should not commercialize our data.
5. When in doubt, ask the SteerCo. You have a group of dedicated Community members there who have a great sense of stewardship and a willingness to help you succeed.

Some other ideas, in no particular order: 
- Take advantage of the existing templates, even if only as a starting place for more improvements
- Look at previous year's schedules to get a sense of what programming can look like.
- Personally I would not recommend programming on Sunday as the end of a week. Ending with a big event like an Algorave is great, and sure if you want to go for a soft event like a social of some kind the next day, like a hangover brunch or a last opportunity for networking, hugs, and photos, but don't program performances on Sunday afternoon, because many people will have already left and the performers of this late event will not have the benefit of a full audience.
- In retrospect it did not make a lot of sense to gatekeep the difference between Contributors and other Community members who attend just to be there. They are often of the same levels of dedication and involvement. Attendee-only folks are usually such a small minority that you can budget to just include them in any events (like for example a Community Dinner/ Contributor's reception/ etc. Make an effort to keep it as open as possible. In our plan we kept a Contributor's Dinner exclusive to invitees, and allowed for a +1 ticket to purchase a spot for partners/etc. but in the end it would have been less mess & hassle to just leave it open. I believe some paid extra for a guest and others just crashed without knowing it was exclusive, and we didn't have a door check, so what was the point of all the extra hassle, if those guest tickets only amounted to 150€ anyway.
- in addition to Keynotes - hosts' opening and closing remarks - take the opportunity to have someone representing the Hosts to speak a bit about the call, the theme you have chosen, the reasons you are hosting. Introduce yourselves as hosts with a prepared welcome. Be the glue that brings it all together and gives visibility to the framework of the Conference and the people managing the production. The presence and personability of the hosts are critical in bringing collegiality and community to the forefront and keep the proceedings from feeling like a mechanical timetable just playing out over the week, and more the like the family reunion we all look forward to when submitting our proposals.
- It is tradition that the conference registration fees are kept as low as possible (it has never yet been over 100€ for contributors) and broken into tiers such that those with strong academic support can pay more than independent unsupported artists and researchers. Contributors and registrants are usually under the honor system to self-select, and to pay on a sliding scale from zero. Traditionally the funds collected from these fees are turned around into a travel support fund to help with costs for those who have to spend the most out of pocket to attend. This year we built a configurable calculator to redistribute funds, and maybe this can be reused in future years. This plays into the fact that many who are attending as performers are more accustomed to getting PAID TO PLAY, but we keep ICLC possible by not paying anyone, and maintaining the distinction that it is not a festival, it is a Conference. (This year we had discussions around the potential of paying performers because one of our hosts saw the ICLC as a hybrid conference-festival, but it did not go forward this way because the majority did not agree with the idea that performers should be paid while paper presenters should pay. Everyone is a contributor on the same level. )
- Peer review - it's not easy to put together the peer review - there are not enough reviewers with expertise to go around. It is even more difficult to distribute them effectively because areas of expertise and interest are so widely distributed. Some of us (organizers) ended up reviewing 15+ entries just to get to the minimum of 2 different reviewers for each entry. We also kept a rule that organizers' entries had to have at least 1 external (non-organizer) reviewer, for fairness. We also spent a crazy amount of time lobbying/canvassing contacts to ask them to be reviewers, just to manage the assignments and make the numbers work at the last moment. Take advantage of the Reviewer lists that are available from past years and be in touch with them, do all you can to get them engaged and keep them engaged.
